For 7 years, I was working [music]
undercover as a spy, and I needed to
know how to manipulate, how to live and
operate without ever being detected, and
how to collect secrets. Okay, I've got
so many questions.
Andrew Bamonte,
he's a former CIA officer
who uses spy skills
to teach anyone how to master their
mind, talents, and potential in business
and everyday life.
When I left CIA, I realized that I could
use CIA skills to succeed in business.
One of the first things you should want
to learn is how do I know if I'm being
lied to? As an example, bad liars. That
is one of the biggest tells of an
unskilled liar. Next, people have four
basic core motivations. Reward,
ideology, coercion, and ego. And if you
can speak to somebody through the lens
of their ideology, you can get them to
do incredible things.
Deception versus perspective. What's
that?
90% of the people out there, they're all
trapped in their own perception, in
thinking emotionally, and emotions are
very likely wrong. So CIA trains us to
recognize and distrust our perception.
And there's two really quick things that
you can do. Next, SAD rat. It's an
acronym. And all of our marketing, all
of our human interactions falls into the
same sad rat process that I learned at
CIA because the human condition is so
predictable. So sad stands for and it's
the reason my company has grown 300%
every year for the last 3 years.
I want to know more. Was there any
situations where you felt your life is
at risk? What do you think about what's
going on at the moment with geopolitics?
Like do you think we're already engaged
in a form of World War II? And then why
are you going to try and leave America
in 2027?
It's absolutely crazy to me that so many
of you have decided to watch our show.
Um, and so many of you have decided to
subscribe to our show. We now have 5
million subscribers on YouTube, which is
a number that I just can't comprehend.
And it's a dream that I absolutely never
could have had. We started the D of a co
just over 3 years ago now. And in my
wildest expectations, we might have had
100,000 subscribers by now. So, you can
imagine how shocked I am that so many of
you have chosen to tune into these
conversations every week um and spend
some time with us. So, thank you. And I
made a deal with you. I made a deal that
if you subscribe to this show that we
would continue to raise the bar. And in
2024, we're going to raise the bar like
never before. I've been working for the
last nine months on a surprise for all
of you that have subscribed to this show
and I'm very excited to deliver that for
you. The production's going to change.
We're going to go even further with our
guests and we're going to tell even more
global stories. So, as always, if you
appreciate what we're doing here, the
simple free favor I'll ask from you is
to hit the subscribe button. Let's get
on with the episode. [music]
[music]
Andrew,
you're well known for your time in the
CIA because people are so intrigued and
compelled by it.
How long were you in the CIA?
I was actually in the CIA for a
comparatively short period. I was only
in for seven years. Uh many people make
a 30 or more year career out of CIA. So,
it was really quite a small blip in
terms of my overall life. I wore uh the
US military uniform for seven years
before that as well. So 14 years total
spent in service to the United States.
And [snorts] what is the CIA?
So the CIA is uh the United States's
intelligence, foreign intelligence
collection uh platform, their primary
agency deemed with collecting foreign
secrets that have any kind of impact in
American national security. So if you
think about it, uh there are multiple
what's called intelligence agencies in
what's known as the intelligence
community or the IC. CIA is just one of
those 36ish
uh community members in the IC. However,
it is the one charged with centralizing
all of the intelligence collected, hence
the central intelligence agency. So it's
the hub in a large wheel of intelligence
collection.
Is that what a spy is? Is it the same
thing as being a spy? So, I'm going to
I'll geek out with you a little bit here
because terminology is really very
important. So, uh there are spies and
spy is a vernacular that's used in
common uh conversation that doesn't
really have a definition in terms of the
intelligence or espionage profession.
You have handlers, you have assets in
terms of traditional espionage. Handlers
are officers who collect intelligence.
Assets are foreigners who provide
intelligence to the handler. So a CIA
officer or an MI6 officer, a Mossad
officer, an MSS officer, depending on
the country, these are officers who
collect secrets. They are therefore
handlers.
And then all the people who provide them
secrets are considered assets.
Traditionally speaking, when you talk
about a spy, some people think a spy is
an asset or a handler. Either someone
who provides information or someone who
collects information. Okay.
Uh and and the term spy is just uh just
confusing enough that often times people
will project their own opinions on top
of that word because they don't
understand the real nuance of espionage.
So I thought of a spy as someone that
goes to another country and collects
information secretly and then sends it
back to the country they came from. So
technically that is an intelligence
operative. Okay. Or an intelligence
officer. Also known as an operator or in
media an operative. Uh sometimes it's
also called an agent, right? An
intelligence agent. These are all kind
of terms that get nebulous. But what you
are describing is a intelligence a
trained intelligence officer. No matter
what country you're in, whether you're
in uh it doesn't matter what
intelligence profession you're in
either. And there are multiple types of
intelligence. There's human
intelligence, signals, intelligence,
measurements intelligence. Anybody who
travels to collect secrets on behalf of
their country is an intelligence
officer.
Is that what you were?
That's what I was.
You started a company after leaving the
CIA called Everyday Spy.
Correct.
For someone that's just clicked on this
podcast now who's trying to understand
the value that they're going to get from
you by understanding the work that you
do at Everyday Spy,
what are they going to get from this
conversation? This conversation is
designed to for me to be able to explain
how spy skills have a very real value in
breaking everyday barriers. And that's
the mission of my company at Everyday
Spy. We use spy education to break
barriers, social barriers, financial
barriers, educational barriers, cultural
barriers, language barriers. If there is
a barrier in life, I've made it my
mission in my company to break that
barrier using a proven real world skill
or technique from espionage.
And what sort of means is that to what
end? So, if I'm, you know, the average
Joe listening to this now, when you say
break barriers, what are those barriers
that that I'm going to be able to break
in my life?
So, I I intentionally use the term
breaking barriers because we all have
different barriers. What the reality of
life is that we all come into barriers
that are similar, but we come into those
barriers at different times. For some
people, there's a barrier in income that
they're born into. For other people, the
barrier that they're born into is that
they don't have a father. For other
people, they come into a financial
barrier when they're 18 and they have to
leave home. Some people don't ever know
financial barriers, but they do know
educational barriers because they suffer
from dyslexia or they suffer from ADHD.
There are people who have barriers that
are due to anxiety. The reality is
there's really 12 or so barriers that we
will all experience in our life, but we
will experience them at different times.
For some of us, it won't happen until we
become parents. For others, it happens
as soon as we hit adulthood. The idea is
that CIA is extremely familiar with
barriers. And what they teach us as
officers going through their training
programs is not just the details of
tradecraftraft, but it's really to
understand that any barrier that we as
individuals face, they can get us
through. But we can also predict
barriers other people will run into. And
if you know somebody else's barrier and
you understand their barrier better than
they do, when you help them through that
barrier, they will tell you secrets.
They will tell me secrets.
As part of your training to become a CIA
officer, you must have learned how to
manipulate people. That seems to me,
from what I know of spies, pretty
foundational to what it is to be a
successful spy and to get information
from someone else. In this conversation
today, are we going to learn how through
your training you were taught to get
information from people and make them do
what you wanted them to do? Yes. And
I'll I'll be very frank here. I try to
exercise something called radical
transparency.
If you want to manipulate people, you
will learn that from this conversation.
If you want to manipulate people, I will
teach you how to manipulate people in in
just a simple conversation. You can
learn those skills. But the thing to
understand that's the most important is
that whether you want to manipulate or
not, others are manipulating you. Just
because you don't know what they're
doing, right? The problem with being an
intelligence operator is that to achieve
the things you have to achieve,
you sometimes have to do things that you
don't want to do. In being a business
owner, what I've discovered is that many
business owners struggle because they
feel like they have to do things they
don't want to do. They feel like they
have to be sleazy. They feel like they
have to be tricky. They feel like they
have to mimic, you know, shy bad guy
business owners, right? The flip side,
if you think of a coin, one side of that
coin is manipulation. And that is a
[clears throat] that coin has value.
Manipulation has value. But the other
side of the same coin is motivation. If
you can get people to do what they want
to do, then you have motivated them. And
that is worth just as much as getting
people to do what you want them to do,
which is manipulating them. We'll get
into all of that, but I want to
understand where you came from because I
think this is quite pertinent to both
your work as a CIA officer, but also
there's um really interesting sort of
psychological elements to why the CIA
chose you that are deep within your
childhood story. Going right back to the
beginning of your life, what is what is
the most important context we need to
understand to understand you?
I think the most important thing to
understand from my childhood is that I
was raised by my mom. Uh, my father
died. My father was killed before I was
born. Uh, he died in a violent crime in
California. I didn't know him ever. And
my mom had to start life with a newborn
son, not just as a single mom, but also
as the single mom of a man who was
killed in a crime. Um, so it was my mom
and my grandma that raised me from very
young. My mom is uh a woman of color.
She's she's Latina. My father was
American Indian. So they there was an
element of racial diversity in 1980 when
I was born that also kind of played a
role in all of that. And the reason that
that's important is not because of what
happened in the past. It's because from
that foundation
my mom married a Caucasian man who
became my stepdad uh who became my
adopted father as well. And I had to
kind of learn how to come of age or
literally come of age in a household
where I didn't know my father. I had a
stepdad who was Caucasian with two
halfsisters who were Caucasian. And my
stepdad's whole goal was to just pull my
mom as far away from her roots as
possible because he didn't want to deal
with all the drama that comes from being
part of a Catholic Latin family. And my
mom was all for that. But nevertheless,
like that was that was the kind of
soup that I came out of.
What were the needs that were going
unmet in your life at that point?
[sighs]
You do not ask easy questions, man. So,
uh, uh, I was not I I did not feel loved
growing up. I did not feel loved. My
mother loved me, and I know logically
and rationally that she loved me, but my
mother was a cold woman. She was focused
on career success. She was focused on
feminism. She was focused on other
things. I I as an adult now, uh my
sisters and I often uh reflect on the
fact that we think our mom was the kind
of woman that didn't want to be a mom,
but it was expected of her to be a mom.
So therefore, she became a mom. So there
wasn't a lot of love. There wasn't a lot
of emotional support. there was plenty
of academic support and it was always
hard because the academic support came I
think as a way of making sure that they
didn't have to provide the other support
because if you have an academically
successful student who turns 18 they can
get the [__] out of the house and you
can have your life back and I think that
was the mission for my mom was just
academic success academic success be
successful so I don't have to take care
of you because I'm not really good at
this whole hugging loving thing uh and I
just want you gone so I feel That was
that was my mom. My dad and my mom I
think had a marriage that was based in a
common set of objectives more so than
shared love. And uh and they were just
kind of pursuing those objectives and uh
and I was fortunate because from that I
was cultivated to be a hardworking
academic success and that led to a full
ride scholarship and that led to you
know success in other parts of life. But
for sure it was it was an un it left
behind a trail of always wondering
who who who loves me in my family? Is
love even important in a family? Does it
matter? Or am I being too focused on
this whole love thing? Uh as an example,
I tell this story because it's totally
normal to me, but a lot of other people
find it surprising. There was a day
where my mom pulled me aside. I was
having an argument with my stepdad and I
went to my mom looking for support and I
asked her to support me, you know, I was
like, "Do do you love me?" Right? Do you
love me or do you love dad more? And she
looked at me and she was like, "Of
course I love your dad more than I love
you because you're my son. I have to
love you. You were born to me. I must
love you. But it's a choice to love your
dad. So, I have to love him more because
it's a choice." And for me, I will never
forget that conversation. And I'll never
forget the look on my mom's face. It was
so simple and so academic and so clear
to her. Uh and it's never been something
I could ever actually accept. And even
now as a husband and a father myself, I
don't understand how that was logically
sound to her. I don't know how you could
ever
actually prioritize who you love.
All of that, as you've said, is the
result resulted in your academic success
and your your focus and all of those
kinds of things. But at at what cost? I
mean, it makes you kind of [__] up,
man. It makes you feel like, first of
all, it makes you feel like your secrets
are justified. It makes you feel like
you must have secrets because there's
nobody that you can talk to about
certain things. I I I remember for many
years, you you can't take you can't take
your love life to mom and dad. You can't
tell them the girl that you think is
cute. You can't talk to them about not
getting picked to go to the prom dance
or anything like that. You can't talk
about that with them because they don't
care. And you can't trust your your
sisters. You can't trust your mom. You
can't trust your dad. You can't trust
the people in your own house. So,
because you can't trust them and because
you can't take certain things to them,
you must keep secrets. And since you
must keep secrets, you must be allowed
to keep secrets. There must be secrets
that are totally acceptable that they
are also keeping from you. So, I grew up
in a world where secrets were something
that was very normal. And then from
that, you start to learn that if secrets
are normal, then lying must also be
normal. and totally acceptable. So,
there's a level of sociopathy that
develops when you feel like you're on
your own. Uh, and that's something that
most people out there who are loners,
who have grown up in that world, they
they learn to understand that there are
certain elements of social behavior that
are not culturally acceptable, but as
long as you don't talk about them, you
can practice them. So that was uh that's
a big part of what I learned personally
was that secrets how to keep secrets
that secrets are normal how to lie how
to lie without being caught and more
importantly that that there is a very
real difference between the people
the people who are raised in a world
where they trust people they trust
others and because they trust others
they have a built-in vulnerability
a built-in deficiency
compared to the people who are raised in
a world where they don't trust others.
Because when you're raised in a world
where you don't trust, you can always
learn to trust. But when you're raised
in a world where you trust first, it's
very difficult to train that person to
know when to not trust someone else.
How do you feel about that wiring that
you have because of that experience?
I mean, it's sad. I'm doing everything
in my power to not wire my children the
same way that I was wired. So I do
believe that there is a faulty wiring
that happened but at the same time it's
been very valuable to me. It's been very
productive and valuable in terms of what
I've been able to experience, what I've
been able to see and do financially,
economically, relationally. I I I
benefit and value and this is a big
challenge that I have is as much as I
sit here telling friends and like I'm
telling you secrets because this is what
happens. We tell people secrets when
they trust you. When I share with you
the challenges of growing up, it's
important to me that I don't sound like
I'm complaining or whining because I had
a fantastic foundation for success after
that. But I defined success in all the
ways that I was trained to define
success financially, economically,
empirically, not based on how I feel
internally. Have you had to do a lot of
work to um counteract the
potential consequences of that wiring as
you become an adult and a father and all
of those things? It's something I think
about a lot. I think I've got my own
pretty uh [__] up wiring. And I'm
scared now because I'm on the footsteps
of becoming a dad myself. [laughter] You
know, I'm with a partner, been with her
for four years. We're talking about kids
right now. And I think Jesus Christ,
like there's a really, you almost can
foresee that there's a really high
possibility I'm going to [__] up as a
dad because my brain is wired towards
like validation and work career success
and I'm a bit of a workaholic and so
have you had to do a lot of work on that
to
Absolutely. So the first thing I'll say
is you will [__] up as a dad.
We will all [__] up as parents. The
question is how big will we [__] them
up? And I'm working very hard to make
sure that the way that I [__] up my kids
is in small ways that they can fix in
small ways. But I already know like the
sins of the father pass on. So I'm just
trying to minimize what I pass on that's
negative and maximize what I pass on
that's positive. The the additional
layer that's that is unique to myself
and all uh professional intelligence
officers is that when we are recruited
into intelligence service specifically
when CIA recruits field operators it's
fairly transparent. They tell you that
you were recruited because you are a
little [__] up. They tell you that you
are you were recruited because of a
certain psychological profile that makes
it so that you pragmatically view things
like secrets and lies. There's a few
different terms we call it uh moral
flexibility.
Depending on the situation, there are
some things that I would deem immoral,
but to do them in a different situation
is totally acceptable. And that's just
something that I'm wired to be that's
that's been wired in me since I was a
kid. But CIA understands how to take
advantage of that, how to use that in a
way that benefits American national
security. There's also an element of
high performance that comes from being
wired a certain way. So there is a tie
between childhood trauma and high
performance. It's a wellknown, it's a
documented connection, but CIA has
learned, as has MI6 and MSAD and all the
other intelligence services of the of
the world. They've learned that when you
train someone who has just the right
amount of childhood trauma, high
performance, when you get your hands on
them at the right time in the right
period of their life, they can be
trained to become extremely loyal,
highly productive field operators that
that end up spending 30 plus years in
service to their nation.
When did they get their hands on you?
They recruited me when I was 27 years
old. Uh coming out of the military in
2007, uh I was looking for whatever the
next step was going to be. Uh and that
was when I was approached by a CIA
recruiter.
I heard that you got a pop-up on your
[snorts] computer screen.
Yeah. Back in the day. That's that's uh
I was actually applying I was a nuclear
missile officer for the CI or excuse me,
I was a nuclear missile officer for the
Air Force. And a nuclear missile officer
in the Air Force controls nuclear ICBMs.
So I wore the the little ring.
Wait, wait, wait, wait. What's a nuclear
ICBM? So a nuclear ICBM is a nuclear
intercontinental ballistic missile. So
the large missiles that carry nuclear
warheads for mutually assured
destruction, nuclear war type of stuff.
So you controlled the nuclear missiles.
I was half of who controlled them. I
wore one ring. Somebody else wore a
different ring and that was that was how
a nuclear missile got launched.
What's what does the ring do?
So the ring is a key. On the end of it
is a key. And when you get uh when you
get a nuclear code that comes in the
code, you put it into a old school
computer system and the two of you take
your key ring and you insert it into the
the silo operating system and then you
turn in unison and when you turn in
unison it launches a nuclear weapon.
How did you get yourself to the point in
life at 27 years old where you're
holding a nuclear key round your neck?
[laughter]
I would love to say it was a series of
good decisions, but uh but it wasn't. I
just I was I did what I was told. That's
how I got there. I did what I was told
when I was in high school and I got good
grades and then my mom told me that the
best school of all the universities that
chose me the best school I should go to
is the Air Force Academy. So then I
accepted a full ride scholarship to the
United States Air Force Academy where I
did what I was told and I graduated as a
lieutenant and then I followed what the
Air Force told me to do from there. and
they they told me to learn how to fly
and then they told me that they needed
me to work in nuclear and space weapons
instead. So then I went to that school
and I did well at that school and and I
ended up just kind of climbing the
ladder. I I I did what I was told and
and then one day I was I found myself
100 feet underground miserable.
It's it's a horrible job.
Why? You're uh so in 2007 when I was a
nuclear missile officer, you sit in a in
a launch control capsule, an LCC uh that
sits 100 feet underground. And you sit
there on a 72-hour shift with one other
person, the other person who holds the
other key. And then you are one nuclear
crew of maybe 30 different nuclear crews
who are all on deployment at the same
time. So at any given time in one air
force base there's 60ish people
underground for 72 hours at a time and
then in different missile base there'll
be a different 60 people underground and
your whole job is just to sit there and
wait for nuclear war to break out and
obviously nuclear war hasn't broken out
and hopefully it never will break out.
So, as you sit there underground, not
seeing sunlight, and as you sit there in
a in a capsule with one other person
that you very rarely ever like, you have
a lot of time to reflect on what am I
doing? What am I doing with my life? I'm
a redundancy of a redundancy of a
scenario that we all are working very
hard to make sure never happens. Is this
a productive life? Like, am I am I
making a difference? Am I leaving a mark
in history sitting here not launching
missiles waiting for a message to come
in that I already know isn't going to
lead to nuclear war? It like it's it
it's a very difficult and thankless job
that even right now as you and I are
having this conversation there are some
200 Americans sitting underground doing
that exact job. And that's just in the
United States. Every country that has
nuclear weapons is doing the same thing.
If an order had come in that instructed
you to launch a nuclear weapon, would
you have done it?
Absolutely. That's what you do. The
other thing that's important to
understand is we're redundancies of
redundancies. So, we don't know if an
order says to launch nuclear weapons. We
just know that an order comes in that
says to insert the keys and turn them.
And if it's a valid order that comes in,
then the machine will let us insert our
keys. We will turn our keys and then the
machine will do what the machine does.
Sometimes that order that's coming in is
saying launch nuclear missiles.
just a drill to make sure that the two
people in the capsule turn their keys.
Oh, really? So, you never know the
difference.
Or just a redundancy of a redundancy.
Man,
it it seems hard to me to understand how
someone would stay in that job for a
long period of time. So, they must have
like really high attrition.
They have they have shockingly low
attrition [clears throat] because they
do such a good job of psychologically uh
identifying the right people for that
job. Were they scouting you, do you
think, from a very um early age to
eventually go into the CIA?
No, I don't believe so. I think CIA is
far too practical to do anything that
requires scouting people from a young
age. I think what more realistically
happened is that they had a very simple
algorithm that they had applied to every
government website so that when people
of a certain um profile applied to a job
on a government website, then they'd get
a flash on their screen just like I did
that said, "Hey, we appreciate your
application. We'd like to have a
different recruiter contact you for a
different opportunity."
What were you applying for on that
government website when that pop-up came
up?
Yeah, I was applying for the Peace
Corps. I was trying to get into the US
Peace Corps because after spending two
years underground uh waiting to launch
nuclear missiles, I thought that it'd be
great to get out of the Air Force and go
do the exact opposite. Kind of like if
you've ever had a really bad breakup,
you go looking for the exact opposite of
the person you just broke up with.
That's that's how I felt.
And the Peace Corp does sort of
humanitarian work around the world.
Exactly. Right. I mean, I was looking to
teach children English in Africa or save
orphans or do micro finance or build
huts. Like, I was looking to to do
something that built the world up
instead of just waiting to tear the
world down.
You get this popup as you're applying
and it says, um, we another recruiter
wants to speak to you or something to
that effect. What happens then?
So, that's when being a 27-year-old
single guy kicks in and you think to
yourself, there might be something
better. So once you think to yourself
there might be something better, it's
really easy to say yes. Like I'll wait.
And that's all the that's all the screen
was asking me to do is just pause my
application for 72 hours. So it's easy
to click yes and then you fall out of
that website and you're just on hold for
72 hours. Either a better opportunity is
going to happen and someone's going to
call me or no one's going to call me and
I can come right back and finish my
application. But just to say no means to
miss the opportunity. And that wasn't
that wasn't me. And then within 72
hours, you get a call. Presumably,
within 24 hours, I got a call. Yeah, I
got a call from an unlisted number. It
just said 703. And uh there was a woman
on the other end of the line. Uh she
gave me a first name, but I don't
remember what her first name was. Uh and
she basically, you know, confirmed who I
was and confirmed that I was applying to
the Peace Corps, asked me if I'd be open
for other government opportunities. And
then she said that there might be
opportunities in the national security
sector that I'd be interested in and
she'd like to send me an airline ticket
and a hotel reservation and a rental car
reservation to come up to DC to hear
more about the job.
What did you think at that point?
I thought it was a prank call. I thought
I thought that the the call wasn't real.
Uh I thought that the call was maybe it
was some kind of gimmick or maybe it was
something else or it just didn't sound
real. Uh especially not when she said
she was gonna like send me a paper
airline ticket and she was going to send
me all this stuff in the mail overnight
FedEx. Uh but then it showed up and then
when it showed up again that 27year-old
single mail kicked in and I was like
well now I have a ticket. Let's see
where the ticket goes and let's go to
the reservation counter at the rental
car desk and is this a real rental car
reservation? It's a real reservation. Is
there a real hotel? And then you just
kind of follow the breadcrumbs.
The rental car reservation is real. the
airline tickets real. You fly out there,
you land. What happens next?
Uh you get another phone call that says,
"Hey, did you get in safe?" And then
they tell you the address for where
you're supposed to show up the next day.
Uh and then you go, it's a nondescript
building. And you walk in and uh for me,
I walked in, there were 10 or so other
people in the waiting room. None of us
really knew what we were there for. We
all knew that we were there for
something related to a government job.
Everybody's dressed essentially the same
way. and uh you know you find out that
this person's in finance and that lady
came from social work and whatever else
it might be and then you eventually
somebody comes out and calls you into a
room and then you go through the first
what we call the first round of
interviews and it's just kind of like a
a fit to see what you're interested in,
what you're not interested in, etc. And
it was at the end of that first
interview that the lady said to me that
uh I might be a good fit for the
National Clandestine Service at CIA,
which I didn't know what that was at the
time. And then she basically broke it
down and she was just like you and I did
at the beginning of this conversation.
She's like, "Essentially, we want you to
be a a field officer or what you might
know from the movies as a spy." And of
course, for me, I was I mean, my
seven-year-old self was like, "I'm going
to be a what? Like, you want me to be a
spy? You want me to like drive fancy
cars and wear tuxedos and always have a
beautiful woman on my side? Like, sign
me up for that. I mean, starving
children in Africa can wait. I want to
do that." But then of course comes the
the by line afterwards where she's like,
"You can't tell anybody that this is
what you're now applying for. We're
going to move you on to the second phase
of interviews. We need you to, you know,
go back to your hotel and go back to
Malmstrom Air Force Base in Montana and
live your normal life. And if anybody
asks you why you're out here, just tell
them that you came out here applying for
a government position and you don't know
whether or not you're going to get it.
And in the meantime, we'll be in touch."
And then they get in touch again.
And then they get in touch again. And
then you go through multiple more rounds
of interviews. So they fly you usually
back to the DC area and then the
interviews just get kind of more
intense. You go from a fit in interview
to a kind of like a a a test like a um
interview that's more of like a test
with somebody else. They ask you
scenario-based questions. They give you
puzzles. Uh they ask you some light
psychological stuff. When you got that
letter in the post saying that you've
been offered a role, how did you feel?
Great.
Yeah.
Yeah. I felt like I had done everything
right. Right. I felt like I mean there
was a part of me that says that that
says and I still kind of follow this
mantra like who gets to do this? So that
felt amazing. And then there was a ton
to use your word a ton of validation
of like now I get it. Now I know why I
went to a college I didn't like. Now I
know why I put up with a stepdad and
listen to my mom and like I don't need
love and you don't need support and you
don't need a family that cares about you
as a person. All you need is to check
the [__] boxes because this is where
you get to go when you check the boxes.
And now that I've checked all the boxes,
I'm free.
Except it doesn't really work that way
because when you're hired because you're
you check boxes, it just the boxes just
change. But you still have to check the
boxes.
And at that point, it goes from
interview to I guess training.
Correct.
During that whole interview process,
you're not allowed to tell anyone, I'm
guessing.
Right.
Even your family.
Nope.
So what what do you tell your family
that you've been up to during that
period?
So this is what's nice about their
recruitment process. Remember I told you
earlier that I I accepted as a child
that there are times that you have to
lie and there are secrets that you have
to keep. This was just a secret I had to
keep and a lie that I had to tell. So, I
told my family that I was looking at
getting out of the Air Force. I didn't
really know what I wanted to do. Maybe
I'd go work for the government. And I
was going to DC to do some government
interviews. I was never close to my
family. From the time I left for the Air
Force Academy at 18, I mean, I went home
maybe once a year. Every time I tried to
go home, it was always a kurluffle
because my parents didn't want to buy
the airline ticket because it was
expensive and I didn't have money to buy
an airline ticket. So, I had to ask
them. And it was the same song and dance
every Christmas holiday, right? like I'd
like to come home. I don't have any
money. Well, we don't have any money
either. Maybe you shouldn't come home.
So, it was really easy to be 27 years
old. Almost 10 years after that, I'm not
really close to my family. So, I tell
them as little as possible. I had a
girlfriend at the time. She was a great
girlfriend, but she wasn't as great as
being a CIA officer was going to be,
right? I had friends at the time, but
they weren't as cool as being a CIA
officer would be, right? So, it was
really easy to just start just cutting
off the branches of my social tree
because I was going to go do something
awesome. I didn't need anybody else.
Did the CIA tell you to disconnect from
these people at all?
They told you that you would have to
eventually. And, you know, they they
explain how you're going to go into
covert service. If you're going to go
into clandestine service, you can't take
a whole rolodex of people with you. So,
one of the things that they asked during
our psychological evaluation was, you
know, how much do you need close
relationships and close peers? And how
do you feel about severing ties with
what we sometimes call like secondary or
tertiary relationships, friends, college
friends? Like a primary relationship is
your spouse. A secondary relationship is
all your close friends. A tertiary
relationship is somebody who you work
with. So, like, how do you feel about
cutting off all those not so important
relationships? And for me, it was easy,
right? I was like, let's let's go. I'm
going to go do something amazing. I
don't need college friends to go do
something amazing.
Do you think your appearance and
ethnicity factored into the CIA's
decision to recruit you?
Absolutely. In 2007, so just to take
everybody back, 2007 was 6 years after
9/11. It was uh 3 years after the CIA
911 commission or the US government 911
commission came out, which basically
said that everything CIA had been doing
up to 2001 was wrong. They were focused
in a cold war era. They were not focused
on terrorism. They were focused on, you
know, Ivy League Caucasian graduates as
being the next generation of CA officer
instead of diversifying for a
diversified world. So, without a doubt,
they were looking for
different people. They were looking for
young people, colored people, you know,
LGBTQ plus people who could connect with
the modern-day threat around the world.
And then I think on top of being brown
and ethnic, I also came with a huge
government file because I had been part
of the Air Force since I was 18 years
old. So they knew everything about my
health, everything about my mental
health, everything about my, you know,
academic athletic performance in
college. They knew everything about me.
Uh, and I think that's part of why my
onboarding process took about nine
months where the typical onboarding
process takes about 18 months. How do
they train you to become a CIA agent?
So, a lot of the training part is
classified still, so I can't talk about
it, but uh but there's a school that we
go to. Uh it's fairly publicly known,
but I can't acknowledge what it is and
isn't. And we go there for many months
and we basically were we're pulled out
of everyday life and we're put into a
controlled simulated world. Um and
inside that simulated world, they kind
of control what's happening around us.
So, uh, if you can imagine almost like
going from, uh, being taken out of your
apartment where you live and now you're
put into a different apartment, but the
apartment that you're put into is part
of a giant game and somebody else
controls the all the game. So they
control the news that's on the TV and
they control, you know, the the cars
that are on the road and and they
control everything except the weather
basically so that they can create
multiple different types of scenarios
where you exercise the skills that they
taught you from driving to first
response, first aid response to lying,
uh living and working under alias
identities, all that stuff. So you're
put into a very controlled environment
for a long period of time where they can
test all of your uh your tradecraftraft
that you're taught.
It's very expensive. It must be very
expensive for them to train a CIA agent,
right? That's why they train us in
batches. So uh there's generally two to
three batches a year that go through
different types of training. And there's
different classifications of officers
too, right? So your analysts are
different than your uh technical
officers who are different than your
field officers. So what they'll do is
they'll batch you into or at least what
they did in 2007 is they would batch you
along with your discipline and then send
a batch to training and then everybody
goes through the same lectures during
the day just like university and
everybody goes through a series of
exercises at different times of the day
and different times of the week but
essentially everybody goes through the
same curriculum and everybody has the
same grades and then those grades are
all measured against each other and the
bottom performers are cut out and the
top performers get to stay that [snorts]
curriculum. What is involved in that
curriculum? You mentioned a few things
there. Is um learning how to kill people
involved in the curriculum?
No, that is not involved in the
curriculum. Not at the basic training
level.
Do they teach you that?
Uh they teach some people that, but they
don't teach everybody that. It depends
on the discipline that you're part of.
If you're a paramilitary officer, you
need to learn how to kill
and you need to learn how to kill in
different ways. Kill quickly, kill
quietly, kill with blunt weapons, clear
with bladed weapons, or kill with bladed
weapons, kill with projectile weapons.
So, kill with explosives, you know,
dearm explosives. So, it all depends on
the the caliber or the level of officer
that you're kind of put into. So,
paramilitary, they must learn that, but
your standard human intelligence field
collector, they need to learn how to
live and work without being caught. So
if you kill somebody,
it's a big deal. You might get caught.
So it's much easier to teach that person
how to manipulate, how to collect
secrets, how to live and operate without
ever being detected. Whereas a
paramilitary officer doesn't need to
learn all that.
They taught you how to lie.
They teach you how to lie.
How do they teach someone how to lie?
It starts with a foundation of making
sure that you recruit people who are
already liars. And then once you when
you're sitting across from a liar, you
can start to understand if they're a
good liar or not very quickly. You've
probably talked to people who are bad
liars. [laughter]
Talked to everything.
Yeah. Yeah.
So you know when someone's a bad liar.
So from that you can identify people who
are good liars. And then when you do
find a good liar, you start to teach
them what they already naturally do that
makes them a good liar. And then you
start to teach them how to refine that
skill and you start to teach them how
bad liars operate and how you can detect
a bad liar and how you gain advantages,
you know, with lies and and how to
handle lies. As an example, because I
promised you skills, bad liars talk a
lot. Good liars talk a little because
the more you talk, the more you run the
risk of undermining your own lie. Bad
liars make a lot of statements. Good
liars ask a lot of questions because if
you ask questions, you're not really
disclosing anything about yourself. So,
if you've ever had if you think back and
you if if you remember ever going to a
party or ever having a date or ever
being in a social environment where
there was somebody there that made you
feel so interesting, but you didn't know
anything about them, you were talking to
a very good liar.
What about body language? Is that a
factor in lying?
Absolutely. I mean, body language is a
factor in everything, but body language
is especially a factor in lying because,
again, going back to the idea of a
skilled liar versus an unskilled liar. A
skilled liar knows how to appear like
they are telling the truth with their
words and with their body, whereas an
unskilled liar often has a disconnect
and their body will say a different
message than what their mouth is saying.
Consider your your stereo stereotypical
jock. Your standard European footballer
or your American jock. A lot of times
they'll be portrayed as like somebody
who like
Yeah. Yeah.
They sit bigger than life and all this
other stuff, right? Their their body
shows confidence and openness, but then
when they talk they sound like idiots,
right? I don't sure like you know
totally like dude that lady like
whatever. They are there's a disconnect.
their voice does not demonstrate the
same confidence that their body
demonstrates. So, you know that that
person is lying. What they're lying
about is not necessarily just the
content of what they're saying, but they
recognize they don't they can't
cognitively accept the fact that they
are in a position where they are telling
an untruth. And that untruth at a
minimum is that they are not super
confident and super comfortable. They
are actually uncomfortable and they are
not feeling confident. and that's why
they're stammering over themselves.
So, when you were lying to someone um
based on your training, would you think
a lot about your body language?
Yes.
And what would you do? What would you
what were the principles of making sure
your body language wasn't letting the
cat out of the bag, per
So, one of the first things to do when
you're when you're trying to lie to
somebody, and again, we're we're now
talking about how to lie to somebody.
You shouldn't want to learn how to lie
to somebody. You should want to learn
how to know if somebody is lying to you.
Mhm.
But we always start this way where we
want to we're afraid to ask the real
question which is how do I know if I'm
being lied to because that shows
vulnerability.
But if you want to learn how to lie to
somebody, the first thing you do is you
mimic the person. Look at you and I
right now. We are mirrored.
Are your hands connected under the
table?
Yeah.
So are mine. [laughter] Are your feet
crossed under your under your seat?
Yeah.
So are mine. We are mirrored right now.
Which means when you look at me
subconsciously, you see yourself. M
I want you to see yourself in this
exercise because if you see yourself,
your initial instinctive response is
going to be trust because who do you
trust in the whole world?
You trust yourself. So the first step to
being able to lie effectively is to be
able to mirror the person you're lying
to. If I was coming at you like,
[laughter]
you know, right away you're going to be
like, I don't know who this guy is,
right? And and similarly if I was to be
like
just for people that are on audio he's
just like doing different postures and
body languages so that that are far away
from my own like putting his hands on
the table etc. So okay it makes sense.
So we want to mirror first and you
mirror because mirroring creates a
foundation of trust. Subconsciously it
creates a foundation of trust and then
once you have that foundation of trust
you just start kind of pushing the
envelope more and more with the untruth
or with the fabrication that you're
creating the lie, right?
Is there anything else on the subject of
telling a lie to someone that's
believable that we we need to be aware
of in terms of skills?
Yes. So, first the whole idea about
there's there's two important ideas that
get glorified in social media that are
just inaccurate. And the first is called
eye movements. You can't actually tell
if somebody's lying to you based on
where they place their eyes.
Because while there are certain elements
of eye movements that have biological
relevancy, there's many, many more
things about eye movements that don't
have biological relevancy. Right? So
what I mean by that is if I ask you uh
what's your oldest memory,
you just look to your left.
It's natural to look to your left when
you're from a western country because
chronologically
timelines start on the left.
[clears throat]
So when you ask somebody a question
about time and they look to the left,
up, down, or in the middle, generally
speaking, that has biological relevancy.
So it's a low probability that they're
lying, but they still could be lying.
When you ask somebody a question, they
look to the upper right or the lower
right or wherever they might look. If if
there's there's not necessarily
biological relevancy because they could
be looking up and to the right because
down and to the left it's too bright
and they could be looking in any number
of directions because maybe they have,
you know, a headache or maybe they have
something else going on. The the ability
to create some sense of probability
about why they're making the eye
movements they're making is too
difficult. So, you can't assess
someone's honesty or dishonesty based
off of eye movements. Even though you're
going to hear that you can from
Instagram influencers and, you know,
Discord and and everywhere on the
internet, you're going to hear that
there's some connection that you can
make justifiably. It's not true. The
same thing is also true. So, it is also
an untruth that you can rely on
something known as micro expressions.
micro expressions being the number of
times your eyes blink or the twitch in
your face or if you're sucking on your
lips. These ideas that get glorified
through social media as indicators of of
deceit. The truth is you don't know if
someone is lying to you until you have
had enough time with the person to
establish what's known as a baseline. A
baseline means what's normal for you.
So, I'll just use you as an example. 10
minutes before the cameras turned on,
you were a totally different person.
Your energy is different. You're so much
more conversational. Like, you are just
you're an awesome, friendly guy
when the cameras are not on.
But you turn into an interviewer when
the cameras turn on. Totally rational,
totally logical, makes total sense. That
doesn't mean that you're lying now and
you were telling the truth then. It
means that the environment has changed
and nobody would know that if there
wasn't a baseline. Mhm.
Most people that watch you don't ever
know what you're like outside of this
baseline.
So, you have to get to know the person
and then understand the variance that's
unusual to understand if they're lying
to you.
Exactly. We call it time on target. You
need time on target so that you can
understand the delta, the change between
their baseline and whatever pressure
you're putting them under.
Was there any sort of uh consistent
telltale signs that someone was lying to
you in an interaction? Like, you know
what I mean? you know certain you know
nervous things that they do change you
know what are those variances that you
might see that you go this person's now
lying to me.
Yeah. So with unskilled liars it becomes
much easier because a lot of times with
skilled liars with people who have
either learned how to lie through formal
training or people who have learned how
to lie through the school of hard
knocks. When there's people who are
skilled liars it's difficult to find
generic tells. With people who are
unskilled liars, it's much easier to
find generic tells. There are people who
you've heard of being on the hot seat.
It's a it's a phrase we use in Western
culture pretty often. Like when someone
is under pressure, we call them being in
a hot seat. When you got an unskilled
liar, they can't stop moving their body.
Like they're just they're always
uncomfortable and they just keep moving
and they keep twitching and they keep
fidgeting and it's like they're sitting
in a hot seat.
That is one of the biggest tells of an
unskilled liar. And again, anybody who's
ever had like a a six-year-old or an
8-year-old or a 12-year-old try to lie
to them, they know what that looks like.
They can't make eye contact. They do a
lot of [snorts]
like verbal uh noises that aren't actual
words. They can't get comfortable. They
keep moving around. They keep shifting.
Shifty.
Those are all all those words came from
real world examples of an unskilled liar
trying to lie. But you don't need micro
expressions of the face or to know which
way their eyes are tracking in order to
pick up on that.
Going back to your training then, what
were some of the other most important
transferable skills that you learned
throughout that process?
The most interesting and useful things
that we learned during training actually
had to do with the psychological
processes that people go through and
being able to understand the process and
then predict and identify when the
process is happening. Those are the
things that really make a huge
difference. Yes, it's cool to learn how
to do a dead drop. And yes, it's cool to
learn how to detect surveillance or how
to drive a car through a roadblock,
right? Those are all very interesting
things. But the most useful things are
the things that you can use all day,
every day through multiple types of
interactions. Uh and there are a series
of processes, a number of processes that
we learned that had to do with human
psychology. One of those processes is
understanding the idea of core
motivations. core motivations are
remember how we talked about
manipulation and motivation are two
sides of the same coin when you
understand all the different options of
the currency that you're working with
you can work with it more effectively so
people are generally despite age race
creed or religion people have four basic
motivations and we call those four basic
motivations rice r i c stands for reward
ideology coercion and ego reward is
anything that you want, money, free
vacations, pat on the back, uh women,
alcohol. If that's something that you
want and me giving it to you gives you
what you want, then that's a reward.
People do lots of crazy things for
rewards.
And these rewards change over time
and by based on person,
okay?
Right. The second primary motivator is
ideology. Ideology is the things that
you believe in. People do crazy things
for the things they believe in. Whether
it's their religion, whether it's their
country, whether it's family, whether
it's what they believe is morally
correct. Right? So if you can assign, if
you can speak to somebody through the
lens of their ideology, you can get them
to do incredible things. C is coercion.
Coercion is all the negative things.
guilt, shame, blackmail, anything that
you do to force someone to take a
certain action by leaning into the
negative element of motivation, which is
also known as manipulation, that falls
under the C or coercion. And then E,
ego, is everything that has to do with
how the person views themselves. So
oftentimes ego gets oversimplified into
thinking that it's just people who have
a big ego, right? Somebody like Donald
Trump who has a big ego or you name the
famous actor who has a big ego. Ego is
also people who don't have big egos.
Mother Teresa had an ego. She wanted to
sacrifice for other people. She wanted
other people to see her sacrificing for
other people. That is also ego. So with
these four core motivations, you have a
rubric, a process to understand why
other people do what they do. If you
understand why other people do what they
do, all you have to do is connect what
they care about with what you want them
to do and you just increase the
probability of them doing what you want
them to do.
Of these four core motivations are is
there an order of the strength that they
have over people. So if you were really
trying to get someone to do something,
you'd focus on this core motivation over
that one.
Yes, absolutely. Ideology is the
strongest. Ego is the second strongest.
Reward is the third strongest and
coercion is the weakest. This is one of
the things that movies get wrong. Movies
try to make it look like you can
blackmail somebody or hold a gun to
their head and get them to do what you
want them to do. In the real world, once
you hold a gun to someone's head, they
never trust you again. You can never get
them to do something twice. Whereas, if
you appeal to their ideology, doing this
is good for your country. Doing this is
good for your family. Doing this is good
for your health. If you can appeal to
someone's ideology, they'll do what you
tell them to do for a long time because
they'll trust you.
Is this really the the essence of
manipulation? Then
that is the essence of motivation and
manipulation, the same coin. You'll hear
me come back to this because one of the
things that people really struggle with
outside of intelligence is they feel
like they have to label things as good
or bad. When you have moral flexibility,
you take away good and bad. everything
just becomes a question of utility or
productivity. If it's if you need
someone to do something and you can
motivate them, then you should. But if
you need someone to do something and you
can't motivate them,
that's a green light to manipulate them
because you still need them to do what
you need them to do. If you feel bad
about manipulating somebody, you are not
going to do well in the intelligence
world. How might you So you said the
ideology is the strongest of the four of
core of the core motivations. How might
you go about finding out someone's
ideology in the context of business and
life?
A lot of times people will volunteer it
to you. There's there's two ways. If
you're a keen observer, people will
volunteer it to you. You've already
volunteered that you are ideologically
predisposed to fatherhood. You've
already talked about it. The reason that
you're worried about [__] up your
kids that you don't even have yet is
because you're thinking about
fatherhood. So clearly you are
ideologically predisposed to what it
means to be a responsible father.
You want to be seen as a responsible
father. That [clears throat] plays into
your ego as well.
So I'm sure when you're talking to your
partner, if you guys are already looking
at where would we go to school, where
would we live, what kind of diapers
should we use? If you're even thinking
about that, you're thinking about it
through the lens of the ideology of
being an engaged, present, helpful,
loving father, right? So people will
volunteer it. your your customer base
will volunteer to you what their
ideologies are. They'll volunteer their
politics. They'll volunteer their their
pain from their childhood. They'll
volunteer their pain from business.
If you listen,
if you listen. The second way that you
can get to understand the ideology of
your customer base is through active
marketing. the right kind of marketing,
not mass marketing, not the kind of
garbage that you see on Instagram and
and YouTube about, you know, how to make
people believe in your brand because you
use the right colors, but actual
marketing where you present a message
and that message was crafted with an
emotion behind it. People who respond to
that intentionally crafted message are
showing what their motivations are
because they were clearly motivated
enough by the message to take action.
You've heard a lot of people talk about
narrative. Especially in politics,
there's, you know, oh, there's the
there's the liberal narrative and
there's the Republican narrative and
there's the conservative narrative and
the church narrative. And people talk a
lot about narrative. Narrative is not
the power in influence. The power in
influence actually comes from messaging.
It takes two steps to get to a
narrative. It takes messaging first and
then messaging builds a narrative. If
you think about messaging, messaging is
supposed to be an emotional thing,
[snorts] just a statement, just a
message, just like a text message,
right?
Are you afraid of being the kind of
father that isn't present for your kids?
that creates emotion in the right
ideologically predisposed person.
There's no woman out there who's going
to be motivated by that. She might be
motivated to tell her partner about
that, but it's not going to it's not
going to resonate with her like it
resonates with me as a father of young
children, but that's just the message.
Then the narrative is not emotional in
nature. The narrative is logical in
nature. So, you use an emotional message
to communicate a logical narrative.
Are you afraid of being the kind of
father that wasn't that's not present
for your child? Man, that just like that
pulls at my heartstrings. Well, then all
you have to do is sign up for this app
that reminds you every Sunday to read
your kids a story. You're like, "Oh,
that makes total sense. All I need is a
reminder and I'm going to be a good
dad."
And that's messaging and narrative. The
same thing happens in politics. The same
thing happens in geopolitics. The same
thing happens the whole world over
because in the intelligence world, we
understand messaging and narrative. We
know how to use messaging and narrative.
It's how you elect a president. It's the
reason that that Saudi Arabia went to
war with Iran over Yemen. Like it it's
everybody understands at a national
security level the idea of creating a
message or a narrative using emotional
messaging. But when it comes to
business, people don't get it yet. They
they haven't learned that lesson yet
because they've all been taught through
an MBA program or something else that
you sell toothpaste by creating more
toothpaste with brighter colors on more
shelves.
Thinking about ideology has and
everything you just said there, has your
experience over the last, I don't know,
20, 30 years really made you rethink and
look at the world entirely differently?
Because if you are so focused and able
to detect and understand messaging and
narrative, you must just see it
everywhere you go in everything you do,
right? So there were two big aha moments
for me and the first was in the very
beginning parts of my training at CIA. I
mean, when I went through all of the CIA
recruiting process and and all of my
time in the military, I just felt like I
was doing the right thing. I just felt
like I was doing a good job. I felt like
I was special,
right? like, "Wow, I must be super
special because I'm getting picked for
the National Clandestine Service." So, I
felt like I was doing everything right.
And then I actually ended up going
through my training program where they
confirmed that I actually was broken in
certain ways. I was high performing
because I had trauma as a child. I I lie
and I steal and I have no problem with
sociopathy because
I'm not mentally healthy. Right? Like
that's basically what they confirmed.
Like you're wired in a certain way
that's really useful, but you're
actually not neurotypical. You're not
you're not successful in the way that
you thought you were successful, but you
are still very useful. And oh by the
way, you're even more special because
now you work for CIA. So don't ever stop
working for CIA
because they know that what drives us is
our ideology, right? Our ideology and
then our ego. So they they hook us that
way. So for me, that was my first big
aha moment because up until then, I
always thought maybe I understood the
world, but nobody else seemed to
understand it the way I understood it.
Like I I could see the hypocrisy in high
school and I could see the hypocrisy in
my mom and my dad and they would do
things that were different than what
they would tell me to do. And I don't
understand how is the customer always
right but then like sometimes the the
company wins the lawsuit. Like it
doesn't make sense. How how how
is there a legal structure but criminals
don't go to jail in if there's a legal
structure? Like I remember seeing it all
and thinking that it didn't make sense
but never actually being confident
enough to say anything about it because
it was a secret and I didn't feel
comfortable sharing that secret. CIA
then taught me you're what you're seeing
is actually the world as it really is.
And let's train you to show you and give
you a vocabulary to understand what
you're seeing. Let's teach you about
human psychology so you understand why
it works the way that it works. why
everybody sees it and nobody talks about
it. Right? So, that was my first big aha
moment. And then my second big aha
moment came when I when I left CIA and I
was unemployed for like six months,
living in my in-laws
converted garage with a one-year-old
child, wondering how the [__] I did so
many things so wrong that I couldn't get
a job even though I was just part of the
CIA.
And in that in that time feeling like
just the world's biggest loser,
the only skill that I could lean on was
what the CIA had taught me to do. So
then I lied my way into a Fortune 10
company.
And all of a sudden, I wasn't a loser
anymore. And once I realized that I
could use CIA skills to succeed in
business,
that was my second big aha moment. So
now everything I see I see through a
lens of CIA skills in a business world.
Perception versus perspective was one of
the other things that I've heard you
talk about um was a quite a big I guess
shift in understanding but something
that the regular person doesn't really
understand.
Yeah. So the idea of perception and
perspective uh I have to define them
first right. Perception is what you
believe you see. Where you sit is how
you perceive the world around you.
Perspective is how other people see
where you're sitting. So when I think
about us right now across the table from
each other, my perception is what I see
of you. Your perspective is very
different than my perception. Right? At
a at a minimum, I'm looking at you with
a background that's different than when
you're looking at me with a background.
So the benefit the advantage that CIA
gives its field officers is that it
trains us to recognize and distrust our
perception because perception really
only comes from from one source and that
is your own five senses. You are the
source of information for your
perception. So for anybody who's ever
seen like a little pile of socks in the
lower lefthand corner and they thought
it was a rat and they jump until they
realize it's socks, that is your
perception
lying to you. Perspective means that you
get data objectively from the world
around you. So if you're in your room
and you see a pile of black in the
corner, your perspective tells you this
is your room. There's never been a rat
in your room ever before. That pile in
the corner is probably something like
socks. You know, perspective keeps
things objective. Perception makes
things very subjective or very
emotional. So CIA trains us to lean into
our perspective, gain perspective, think
about things objectively because if you
lean on your perception, you're leaning
on emotions, and emotions are very
likely wrong.
How how can I train myself to lean more
on my perspective?
There's two really quick things that you
can do. The first is is immediately
distrust your emotions. know right away
when you're feeling emotions. In other
words, what I'm saying is don't trust
your gut, which is the antithesis of
what most people tell you to do. Most
people say, "Trust your gut." I'm
telling you right now, your gut is more
often than not lying to you because your
gut is based in emotion. Your
girlfriend's not about to dump you. Your
boyfriend isn't cheating on you. You're
not about to go bankrupt. Nobody cares
about the zit on your nose. Right? That
is most likely true. There's a small
chance that your perception is correct.
But when it comes to gambling, are you
going to bet on the small chance or the
bigger chance? You should always you
should always gamble on the bigger
chance. The bigger chance you only
really understand through perspective.
If you have perspective on something,
then you have multiple data points on
something. So when you feel yourself
getting emotional, stop and let your
emotion happen for a second. Right? I
feel nervous. I feel anxious. I feel
doubtful.
Okay,
I probably don't have to. You probably
shouldn't because whoever's sitting
across the table from you, whoever's
coming into the room with you, whoever
else is on the bus with you, they are
all focused on a thousand different
things. And the things that they're
focused on most likely don't include
you.
Sounds easier said than done.
Correct.
Is is that a process of repetitions to
train yourself to think like that?
It is. it it takes uh momentum. So what
ends up having to happen is that you
need to exercise it intentionally at
first and what happens is as you
intentionally exercise your perspective
over perception, what will start to
happen is your you will start to see
that what you were worried about doesn't
happen. And then once you see it not
happen, once you see your perspective
give you the correct information over
your perception, once you see that
happen once, then it starts to gain
momentum and then it happens again and
it gains more momentum and more momentum
and more momentum until the time comes
that you realize it's much easier. But
it is it's a learned skill. You have to
learn to think objectively instead of
subjectively. Think rationally instead
of emotionally. And a big part of what
helps you do that is understanding that
90% of the people out there, they're all
trapped in their own perception. They're
all trapped in thinking emotionally.
They don't even know that there's an
alternative. Just think about this, man.
The conversation we're having right now,
the people who are hearing this
conversation right now who have never
heard that there's a difference between
perception and perspective are already
better equipped than all the other
[__] who have never heard this
conversation. They are already one step
ahead of their competition. They're one
step ahead of their of their spouses,
their partners, their bullies. They're
one step ahead of everybody because now
they can use the words perception and
perspective, subjective and objective,
emotional and logical and rational. They
can use these words to define how they
want to think even if they don't think
that way yet. That's the huge advantage
to what CIA calls the trained and the
untrained.
trained people at least are aware that
there's an alternative option. Untrained
people aren't even aware that there's an
option. The vast majority of people out
there are what I call bobbleheads.
They don't even know there's an option.
They're completely unaware of an
alternative solution, an alternative
process. So, they're trapped in their
perception. They're trapped in their
emotion. They're trapped in their
subjectivity. And that makes it so much
easier for people like you and me and
everyone listening right now to use
rational objective perspective to get
those people to do whatever we want them
to do.
You've had um a lot of recent success in
business, you know, um with your
company, Everyday Spy, and other
ventures that you've been involved in.
What are some of the fundamental skills
that um you find yourself transferring
directly from
your CIA experience every day when
you're closing business?
At CIA that there's a saying at CIA that
I realized is also a saying in business
that I didn't realize until afterwards
and it's called kissing a lot of frogs.
Mhm. And it's a salesmanship term
outside of CIA where it means that you
have to you have to call a lot of leads,
you have to shake a lot of hands, you
have to make a lot of pitches before one
of them turns into a prince. Right? At
CIA, we have the same concept, but for a
different reason because finding a
person who is willing to tell you state
secrets,
willing to risk their life to give away
the secrets that they were entrusted
with. That's what a that's what an
actual asset does, right? When when CIA
sends a field officer to you name the
country. When they recruit an asset from
that country, what they are actually
recruiting is a foreign national who is
a local of that country who has access
to state secrets who is willing to share
those state secrets in exchange for
something else. Money, alcohol,
pornography, you name it, right? who
knows what they're after. But your job
is to find the person who has secrets
and give the person the thing that they
want in exchange for those secrets.
That is a rare person to find. It is
hard to find
a a willing collaborator from a foreign
country who has access to secrets and is
willing to share those secrets with you
in exchange for some kind of
remuneration. Very very difficult to
find. But if you can find a spy, if you
can find a trader, you can make a sale,
right? The two skills are incredibly uh
interconnected. So what I found is that
this this uh the process and the skills
that we use to find an asset translate
immediately into business. Everything
from how you talk to the person so that
you can identify their core motivations,
gaining perspective over that person's
position in life. If you can gain the
perspective of your customers, you
already know what your customers
thinking. You already know what they
want. You already know what their
problems are. You know what their
problems are going to be because you can
sit in their shoes, but they can't sit
in your shoes, which gives you the
advantage. So the the process in
espionage is a process called SADRAT.
SAD R A T.
Very similar to the the Rice acronym I
gave you earlier. SADRAT is a process of
human intelligence conversion or
collection. The SADRAT process is
actually the foundation to my company's
sales process.
All of our marketing for digital sales,
all of our human interactions, all of
our uh upselling and everything else all
falls into the same SADRAT process that
I learned at CIA, only we use it for
sales and we use it for marketing.
SADRAT.
SADRAT stands for spot, assess, develop,
recruit, handle, and terminate. That's
what SADRAT stands for. Uh and in
classic uh classic US government acronym
jargon, handle starts with an H, but in
the acronym we use the letter A. Spot,
assess, develop, recruit, handle,
terminate. Spot means you find a
potential client, right? Recruit means
you sell that client on your product in
exchange for your product, in exchange
for their money, right? Assess is a step
that we use at CIA to determine whether
or not somebody will be a good
productive client. Oftentimes in sales,
people skip that step.
Yeah.
They don't think about a good productive
customer. A good productive customer has
lifetime customer value. A good
productive customer turns into
referrals, turns into positive reviews
and positive ratings. They have infinite
value more than just the money they give
you in exchange for your service.
assess is a critical piece in the CIA
recruitment process. It's also a very
important piece in my company.
I'll tell tell you something which kind
of validates that from my own experience
before we continue on that point of
assess. Um in the first couple of years
of my first company, we would just take
any customer. And when we looked at our
um financial record for the previous
year, what we noticed was that there was
a cohort of customers that were
exceptionally valuable. And even though
we'd won business with this other set of
customers, we're actually losing money
because they were only lasting for a
month.
So we made this sort of um framework to
determine the customers that we should
actually say no to basically as you say
based on their lifetime value. And we
figured out that there's this certain
type of brand that has a certain size
budget that has a certain number of
employees that is trying to solve a
certain type of problem that would be
exceptionally profitable for us. So when
we got the inquiries coming through our
website, we were now looking at the
inquiries through that lens and
measuring them through that lens because
it became so clear that all of our best
customers fit into the sort of top right
of this this sort of ven diagram. And
that's what I hear when you say assess
and it was absolutely game-changing for
our business. But most entrepreneurs
will just take every customer and they
think of all of them as having the same
potential and lifetime value.
Exactly. You just nailed the word
gamechanging.
You can play the game by just selling to
anybody, but if you want to change the
game, you have to make sure that you're
selling to a very deliberate cohort of
customers because those customers not
only yield more revenue per customer,
but they bring in more customers like
them,
which is where you get an exponential
level of not revenue, but profit. Just
like you said, you you talked about a
very profitable group of clients, not a
high revenue group of clients.
So when you focus the conversation on
profit instead of revenue, and you focus
it on the right customer instead of just
customer, it it's gamechanging for your
company.
So you would assess targets in the CIA
for using the same sort of framework.
Yep. using the same framework because in
in recruitment operations what you're
looking for is people who will be good
assets. In the business framework, what
you're looking for is people who will be
good customers. An asset and a customer
are almost the same thing, right? A
customer is the most important asset of
a company. And what does a customer do?
A customer provides something of value
in exchange for something they want.
What does an asset do? They provide
something of value in exchange for
something they want. So it's really a
one forone comparison as as long as you
understand the language of espionage and
the language of business. So what we did
in espionage is every time you're you're
trying to develop a source, you're
always asking yourself the question,
will this source be a good reliable
asset in the future? Will they do what
we tell them to do? Will they be able to
provide information in the long term,
not just once or twice, right? Is the
information they provide high value
information? It's the same thing you're
doing with a customer. Will this
customer do what I tell them to do? Will
this customer provide high levels of
value? Will this customer last for a
long time?
You use the word espionage a few times
there. What is the definition of the
word espionage?
Espionage is defined as the stealing of
secrets. So espionage is always illegal.
There's no country in the world that
says that espionage is legal. So
espionage is it's uh when CIA commits
espionage, when MI6 commits espionage,
they have a a carveout in their law as
it pertains to their own undercover
clandestine services so that a American
can conduct espionage overseas and not
be prosecutable for that espionage under
US law if they're part of CIA. Same
thing is true in the UK. An MI6 officer
can commit espionage overseas and not be
held accountable for it under British
law. They're it's a carve out.
Otherwise, if you're a British citizen
committing espionage anywhere in the UK
or abroad, you are punishable under UK
law.
I've heard you say that espionage really
is about getting people to let you into
their secret lives.
Correct.
What is our secret life? So, uh, you
know, I I if you go back to an earlier
part in our conversation, we were
talking about how when you trust people,
you'll tell them your secrets, right?
When you help people, they'll tell you
their secrets. There are three lives
that any anybody lives. We have a public
life, a private life, and a secret life.
The public life is the life that we're
all very familiar with, right? It's the
life that you live for everybody else to
see. Not just the people who watch your
podcast and the people who, you know,
work for you and your company, but your
public life also includes what you show
your friends. It includes what you show
your church. It includes who you are
when you walk down the street. The
clothes that you choose to wear are a
perfect example of your public life.
It's what you want people to think of
you. Remember the e in rice? Mother
Teresa wanted people to see her a
certain way. That is her public life.
When you're in espionage, the goal is to
get away from the public life because if
you want someone to give you secrets,
you can't get secrets from somebody
who's in their public life because
they're protected in their public life.
So, you have to move them from public
into secret. And the middle step between
public and secret is private life. So,
you have to move somebody from public
life to private life. Private life is
the life that your partner knows.
Private life is the life that your
closest friends know. Your mom and your
dad may know it. It's the people who
know that your feet secretly stink. It's
the people who know that you don't
really like to eat oysters because
whatever they give you gas. That that's
all stuff that's private. Your business
partners don't know that. Your customers
don't know that. The people who watch
your podcast don't know that. And it
makes the people in your private life
feel like they know you. And it's what
makes it so that for you in your public
life, you feel like you have meaningful
relationships because instead of 200
people who you kind of know, now you've
got 15 people who are in your private
life. They know your home address. They
know your birthday. You know, they know
your favorite ice cream. It makes you
feel good. Inside of someone's private
life, they will share sensitivities, but
they may still not share secrets.
Because it's one thing to secretly tell
somebody that you're worried about your
business, you're worried about the next
revenue cycle. You're worried about
maybe your wife is having an affair.
Those things are uncomfortable, but
you'll share them with people in your
private life. But you would never tell
someone in your private life that you're
having an affair. You would never tell
someone in your private life that you
hit your child. You would never tell
someone in your private life that your
parents sexually molested you or
whatever else. Those dark, deep secrets,
only live in your secret life. The life
that's so secretive that you don't even
share it with the people in your private
life. What we're trained to do is to
follow a process that allows us to meet
somebody in their public life, get them
to let us into their private life, and
then get them to let us into their
secret life. Because it's a very like
simple psychological process to get into
someone's secret life because secretly
we all want somebody in our secret life.
We all want to have someone we can tell
our secrets to. We just don't trust
anybody in our private life enough to
get there. So if you know how to
leverage perception and perspective, use
the four core motivations. When you know
how to leverage sad rat to to create
trust, you can actually cut into
someone's secret life. And once you're
in someone's secret life, they never
stop trusting you. They never let you
leave because it was so rare and so hard
to find you from their perspective. They
don't ever want you to leave. So even if
you even if you break their heart, even
if you even if you lie to them, like
their trust in you is so great and so
strong and so subconscious that you
don't ever leave their secret life.
I'm very keen to know how you get into
someone's secret life and how they might
get into your own. And we've talked
about some of those principles earlier,
but I was wondering if one of the um
techniques you might use is by sharing
your own fake secret life with them to
create an element of comfort. I think I
I've heard and I I think I know from
doing this podcast generally that
vulnerability creates vulnerabilities to
some extent. I if you open up to someone
that they're more likely to open up to
you.
Correct. There's a So you're getting
into now a form of mirroring much like
we were talking about physical
mirroring. Now what you're talking about
is emotional mirroring. that there's a
nuance there because
you have to know when to mirror
appropriately because if if you're
mirroring somebody else and they know
that you're mirroring them, then
subconsciously they feel like they're in
control.
Okay. Interesting.
So, what you need to do is you need to
mirror just enough to get to the place
where you can get them to mirror you.
when they mirror you subconsciously they
know that you're in control.
So once you are in a position of power
or control in a conversation then you
can use the ploy of feain vulnerability
which I wouldn't quite use it the same
way you did. I wouldn't make up
something vulnerable. Instead I would we
call it opening a a window
or opening a window that opens a door.
So we have these windows and doors in
conversation. So opening a door means
completely changing a subject,
right? So if I were to just say right
now, I don't really like French food.
That's opening a door. You as the
interviewer can go through that door, or
you can close that door because it's not
relevant, right? But if I open a window
about how I have certain digestive
challenges that I don't like to talk
about, that's a window. You can always
come back and push on that window and
get me to go through a whole new door of
conversation. Right? So when it comes to
vulnerability and conversing with
somebody about vulnerability, you want
to present windows and not present
doors. So instead of saying something
that's a fake vulnerability, you would
say something that's a real
vulnerability that may not be applicable
to you. Like perhaps you say something
like, you know, I I have been having
massive arguments with my wife recently
and sometimes it makes me just want to
leave home. That's real. That's not
saying I'm going to leave home. It's not
saying what I'm arguing about, but if I
believe that in your secret life, you
are also fighting with your wife and
you're living in a different room and
you're not telling anybody about it, I
want to show some sort of bridge between
us that gets you to admit that to me.
Because if you can admit that to me,
maybe I can find out more about what
you're doing to cope with the fact that
your marriage is falling apart. Maybe
you have a girlfriend, maybe you're on
Tinder, maybe you're doing something
else, right? Maybe you're drinking,
maybe you're doing drugs, I don't know,
but I need you to let me into that
secret life. So, I'm going to present a
window and see if you go through that
window.
So, say that I was the asset and you
were the CIA agent. You have more
experience in that role than I do. Um,
and I was sat in a bar and I said to
you, "Yeah, God, this week's been really
hard at home cuz my wife, she's she's
annoying me." What What and you were
trying to get into my secret life. How
might you maneuver from there?
Right. So there's a the basic principle
here that we would use is called the two
and one combination. So two means two
questions and one means one
confirmation.
So when you present to me a topic that I
want to explore further, the most
rudimentary of techniques out there is
you present to me a topic I want to
explore. So I ask a follow-on question.
You will answer my follow-on question
because you're predisposed
to answer my question. I will ask
another follow-on question. You'll be
predisposed to answer that as well. And
then I'll say something that confirms
what you're saying. That way, it doesn't
feel like you're being interrogated.
Instead, it feels like you're talking to
somebody who gets you.
So, I'll confirm what you say, like,
"Oh, yeah. I mean, I had a girlfriend
once and her feet stank so bad and man,
it just made me want to like sleep with
her feet outside of the covers." M
and then you just stop there because
you've asked two follow-on questions and
one confirming statement. The psychology
of the other person is going to be to
continue volunteering information and
then you just repeat the cycle. So they
give you another piece of information,
you follow follow-up question, follow-up
question, confirmation, follow-up
question, follow-up question,
confirmation. To you, it feels
formulaic. Listen, ask a follow-up
question. Listen, ask a follow-up
question. To them, it feels like they
are talking to somebody who really,
really cares. Just put yourself in the
shoes. Practice a little perspective
here. Imagine if you really were talking
about something that was frustrating you
and the person sitting next to you at
the bar literally didn't do anything
other than ask you follow-up questions
and agree with you. You're going to feel
like, "You get me, man. Why can't my
wife get me like you get me?" Like, you
know what I'm talking about. I
completely agree with you, man. Tell me
more. Oh, dude. And then and you can see
how we'll just human beings just fall
right into the groove.
The parallel here to business, but also
the sort of transferable skills here are
quite clear. From what I heard, when I'm
doing an interview, when I'm meeting a
candidate for a job, um, when I'm trying
to sell to a client, really, my
disposition should be to be doing
exactly what you said, asking them
questions, confirming, asking them
questions, and confirming.
Right. If you think about it,
everybody's in a in a contest for
control. Who controls a conversation?
The person asking the questions or the
person saying the most words? It's
always the person asking the questions.
Because the person asking the questions
determines the direction of the
conversation.
It feels the other way around, though.
It feels like the person speaking the
most has the most control.
And what did I tell you about feelings?
Don't trust them. Don't trust your gut.
Don't trust your emotions. Right? It
feels like the person talking the most
is the person in control. It is not. It
is not. The person asking the questions
is in control. Think about this
interview right now. I will answer
whatever question you bring up next. If
I don't answer the next question you
bring up, I will feel awkward
because you and I both know who's in
control of this conversation, even
though I'm the one saying the most
words.
Interesting.
the the implications of this in sales,
human resourcing, marketing,
advertising,
it it's it's the reason my company has
grown 300% every year for the last three
years. It's because the human condition
is so predictable. People just want to
feel heard. They want to feel listened
to and they want to feel validated. You
can automate that. You can automate the
process that makes people feel heard,
confirmed, and validated. You can
automate it and then they will sell
themselves. That's how that's really
good digital marketing. That's how it
works. Really good direct sales. That's
how it work. That's how it works. Really
good salesmen have already learned this.
Real good salesmen understand that it's
all about getting a lead to talk about
themselves as quickly as possible. And
then once they start talking about
themselves, you just ask questions. Let
them lead themselves through the sales
process. The problem is with most
business owners out there who haven't
been trained in what we're talking
about, they feel like they have to talk
the most. They feel like they have to
get the customer to understand the
benefits of the product. I need to get
you to hear me. I need to get you to
listen. I need to get you to understand
the value of what I'm offering you.
That's not what the customer wants.
That's the salesperson's perception.
What the customer actually wants is a
product that's going to solve their
problems and a salesman that's going to
help them. What's the kind of person
that helps you? The person who asks
questions.
I'm really interested in this concept of
change and how the CIA drills into you
that you need to accept change. Because
in our all all of our lives, one of the
things that most of us are quite bad at
is accepting change. We're very rigid.
Again, maybe that's because of
perception and ego and these kinds of
things. But when I was reading through
um the what they teach you at the CIA,
they change your relationship with
change.
They do. So a big part of the advantage
of having change is the fact that it's
not natural to accept change. So if you
can adapt to change faster than your
opponent, you have a built-in advantage.
You have an edge. So the these three
principles time, distance and change in
direction. These three principles that
CIA teaches as concepts apply in
multiple different ways. So as an
example, time means that you need to
accept that things take time, that time
is a resource for you to use. Too often
we feel like time is fleeting, time is
running out, we have to take action
quickly, like time is against us. That's
not really true. In fact, time is a tool
that you can use to break things down.
Secrets don't withstand the test of
time. How long will it take for you and
I to get into each other's secret lives?
Nine months. That takes time. Not many
people would wait nine months for
anything, right? But time is a huge
advantage that you have. If all of your
opponents are rushing and you're the
only person who isn't rushing, time
becomes a huge advantage to you that
nobody else has. Explain that in the
context of business then.
So, uh, in business, people are trying
to make a rapid sale. Most people want
an impulse buyer, right? What do I have
to say right now to get you to buy my $7
thing? I don't really want you to buy a
$7 thing. I want you to buy a $97 thing.
If it takes me three weeks to get you to
buy a $97 thing, it takes this other
person three minutes to get you to buy a
$7 thing. Who's the better salesman?
Well, I would argue that it depends on
what you're looking for in terms of
long-term. This person selling a $7
thing every three minutes has to find a
new lead.
They have to find arguably if they sell
one out of every 10, if they convert at
10%, they need to find 10 new leads
every three minutes to make $7. If I
convert at 10%, I need one person to buy
a $97 thing every 3 weeks. I have a much
less demand on my time to find new
leads. And I can qualify my leads
better. And if someone's willing to
spend $97 on something, guess what that
tells me about that person? They have
more disposable income. The $7 person, I
don't know anything about their
disposable income. Do they have some? Do
they not? Is that mom and dad's credit
card? I don't really know. I'd rather
spend three weeks of time cultivating a
person who buys a $97 something because
then I can sell them a $297 something
and then I can sell them a $997
something because I can test their
threshold for price sensitivity.
Was there any situations during your
time abroad where you felt like like
your life was at risk or any sort of
really clear apparent threat? Yes, there
was there's one specific moment which
I'm actively trying to get cleared by
CIA uh to talk about where I felt like
with high confidence that I had fallen
under the scrutiny of a local country's
surveillance team. So I was in a foreign
country. I believed I fell under their
surveillance apparatus and they were
actively surveilling me. And the country
that I was in and the job that I was
doing in that country
made me believe that if I had a
surveillance team on me, their goal
would be to apprehend me at a certain
point in the operation at a point where
they could get the most uh propaganda
and political leverage etc etc. Uh so
that occurrence happened in about 2011.
And I'm trying to go through a process
now to get that cleared by CIA. Up until
about nine months ago, CIA was giving me
the thumbs up that I'd be able to talk
about it. But then geopolitical tensions
in the world changed and CIA changed
their mind along with that. So now I'm
exploring what avenues I have to get
them to adhere to their previous
approval of letting me tell my story
versus uh being forced to adhere to my
continued secrecy agreement. So you were
in a foreign country. You felt like you
were under the surveillance apparatus of
a foreign country. What gave you that
impression? Was it looking over your
shoulder and seeing something or
It's the process that we're trained to
use for surveillance detection. So we're
trained in a process where you run
what's known as an SDR. And in that SDR,
you have steps, methods that you use to
determine whether or not you are being
actively surveiled. And again, we use
time to our advantage. So, it's not like
something happened in five seconds and I
thought I was under surveillance. I
intentionally carried out a series of
steps over say three hours or 6 hours
and over that period of time I had
enough information, enough data points
to confirm with high confidence that I
would be under surveillance.
SDR
surveillance detection route.
Okay. And that could be like a car
following you or it could be
a person following you or a drone
following you or your phone being uh
acting in a certain way to make you
believe that you're being digitally or
cyber uh surveiled.
Sex pionage.
My favorite subject. It's a very real
thing. It's a very real thing that's
used in different ways based off of uh a
a country's civil rights.
So in the United States, we don't really
use sexion. We don't really use it
because it goes against the rights, the
individual rights of the citizen who
works at the intelligence agency, right?
So if you tell a female intelligence
officer that they must sleep with this
target in order to get information,
you're violating her rights as a US
citizen. In China, that's not the same
case. In Russia, that's not the same
case. Right? In the UK, they are also
they don't subscribe to forced sexual
acts in service of collecting
intelligence.
Forced
forced,
but you can if you want to.
What ends up happening is you can if you
want to. And for those people who do,
they end up creating what's known as an
operational security risk because once
sex is involved, the power shift becomes
untenable.
So if the whole goal of a handler is to
maintain control over the asset,
once sex happens,
it's harder for the handler to maintain
control over the asset in a objective
relationship because now sex leads to
feelings like hormonally it leads to
feelings. The act of orgasm releases
certain hormones that create senses of
connection with another person. Right?
So when that oxytocin drops, when that
neuroepinephrine drops, you your body
starts to tell you that you are
connected to another person, that is the
antithesis of a proper asset handler
relationship.
Fall in love with them. [laughter]
And we call that falling in love with
your asset.
I won't ask you if you ever engaged in
anything like that. I appreciate that. I
was fortunate enough that I made all the
connective hormones I needed to make
with my wife who was also CIA.
Disguises.
Did you ever wear a disguise?
Absolutely. Yeah. Disguises are
something that are much more common than
people would believe and much less
quality than people would believe.
Really?
Yeah. So, most disguises, what we
actually call disguises inside CIA, we
call them costumes. We don't really call
them disguises. Disguises is a word
that's used in pop media and pop
culture. In the real world, we call them
costumes. And our costume department,
our our disguise department. The whole
objective behind a disguise or a costume
is just to make you not look like you.
Not to make you look like someone else,
not even to make you look like a
realistic person. It's just to make sure
that you don't look like you. Right? So
consider your picture, what you look
like. You have some very definitive
features. Your nose, your forehead, your
beard shape, your hair, right? The the
way that you hold your face, the
neckline that you have. So, if we wanted
to change your appearance just so that
you didn't look like Steven Bartlett,
all we'd have to do is take away those
things that make you you and turn them
into something else, right? We could put
a a nappy redheaded wig on you. We could
put giant oversized sunglasses on you.
We could shave your face or paint your
beard uh gray or even put a fake
mustache on. We could put an oversized
necklace around your neck and now the
picture of that is not going to look
like the picture of Steve Barllet.
Those are all light disguises though,
right?
Correct.
Is that there's deeper types of
disguises, right? Correct. I've always
wondered if they like plastic surgery
and you know if they give a spy plastic
surgery and those kinds of things.
Uh so there's three levels of disguise.
There are some places that will go as
far as permanent plastic surgery,
but most western services won't do that
because it it's it doesn't help the
officer. Like to have a permanent change
to your body made doesn't make you more
effective at going undercover because
now you're just permanently changed. So
you still look the way you look. The
value in a disguise is being able to
reset the disguise, to reset the costume
so that you don't look like yourself.
So, our three levels are level one,
level two, level three. Light disguise
is level one. Level two is long-term
disguise. Level three is something that
we call prosthetic disguise. So, light
disguise is what we talked about.
Oversized sunglasses and a nappy wig.
And all of a sudden, you're a different
a different person, right? You're you're
Lyola. You're not Steve Bartlett
anymore. Phase two is long-term
disguise. Long-term disguise means it's
still you, but we change you
physically for a long-term operation.
So, instead of having short hair, we
grow your hair long. Instead of having a
beard, we shave you clean. We lose some
of that hard-earned body mass that you
have. Or we gain body mass that you
don't really want, right? Maybe we put
some kind of fake but long-standing
tattoo on you, right? we do something
with you that changes the way you look
physically. It's still you. The reason
that's important is because you always
have to ask yourself the question, what
will a police officer think when they
storm into your hotel room at night? If
you're wearing a light disguise and a
police officer storms into your room at
night, they're going to ask questions
like, why do you have a wig? Or if you
don't have a wig, you just wear a ball
cap and a hoodie. There's nothing for
them to ask, right? They're basically
saying, oh, this is you. Your license
says it's you and you wear this ball
hat, this ball cap, and this hoodie all
the time. Whatever. You're not going to
jail for that. So, level one and level
two disguise are are very safe. It's
hard to get someone arrested using those
two. Level three is what the movies are
made out of. That's your prosthetics. If
we put fake ears on you, if we put a
fake nose on you, if we change your eye
color, if we put in a fake missing
tooth, right, instead of a real missing
tooth, if we do that kind of stuff to
you, police officer breaks into your
room in the middle of the night. Now,
they ask, "Why do you have a fake nose
that you're not wearing right now? Why
do you have fake eyebrows? Where why do
you have fake ears? Why do you have a
blacked out tooth?" Right now, they look
at your your ID and you don't look like
your ID. much less common. I'm guessing
that
very uncommon. Very uncommon. And you
would use them strategically at
different times. But if you watch too
much Mission Impossible or Alias, you
start to think that people wear
disguises all the time. There's so many
problems to disguise. There's there's so
many operational uh inadequacies to
operational to to disguise that we could
have a whole conversation about it,
right? Like things don't stick to your
face in the extreme cold. Things don't
stick to your face in the extreme heat
or when you're sweating your ass off in
the Philippines. Things melt. Makeup
melts. Uh the the adhesive that sticks a
fake mustache to your lip starts to
disintegrate. Like there's all sorts of
problems with prosthetics in real life
that Tom Cruz doesn't have to worry
about in the movies. When people think
of spies doing espionage overseas,
wearing disguises and all these kinds of
things, it does make you think they must
be exceptionally good at dealing with
fear because a lot of people would be
too nervous or too anxious or whatever
to not like crack under that kind of
pressure. If you're meeting the guy that
has the nuclear codes for Iran or
whatever, um, and you've been working
for 9 months to meet this person, you
know, you've got to have a good handle
on your own anxiety and your own fear.
Do the CIA target people that are good
at that or do they train that or is it
both?
It's both. It's a great question. It's
both. CIA wants people that carry a
certain level of anxiety because when
you carry anxiety, you're naturally
paranoid, which means you have
heightened observational skills.
Most people who suffer from anxiety feel
like they're inadequate in some way. In
reality, they are hyperadequate. They
are more than adequate. Anxiety is a
superpower through the eyes of the CIA.
I would take somebody with anxiety any
day over somebody without anxiety
because anxiety keeps you alive. Anxiety
keeps you sharp. Anxiety keeps you
learning. It keeps you attentive. It's a
good thing. But to your second point,
you are also trained. You are trained to
understand how fear works. And like to
oversimplify it, your brain has two
hemispheres, right? A left brain and a
right brain. Your left brain is your
logical brain. Your right brain is your
emotional brain.
Because you have two different
hemispheres and they operate on a on two
different bases, right? One is based in
logic, one is based in emotions. They
actually operate and they process at
different speeds. Your logical brain
processes much slower than your
emotional brain, which is why it takes
you an instant before you're scared, but
it takes you maybe minutes, hours, weeks
before you're convinced. So what ends up
happening is fear in an untrained
person, going back to our conversation
about trained versus untrained, in an
untrained person, fear is an emotion
that's processed by the emotional brain
very quickly. So then they react
instinctively to their fear. That's
where a lot of people who suffer from
anxiety get held back.
When you can train someone to understand
that
the same thing that makes them
emotionally scared is also being
processed by their logical brain. Your
brain is actually going through the
process of determining how scared you
really need to be. If you can just slow
down the emotional brain and train the
rational brain to work a little bit
faster, your whole relationship with
fear completely changes.
How do they train you to slow down your
emotional brain so that you don't react?
That's a big part of the reason why you
have a controlled training environment
that lasts for multiple months because
what they do is they inoculate you. It's
called stress inoculation. They
inoculate you with scenarios designed
specifically to trigger your emotional
response. Even though you have been
trained to not trust your emotional
response, they inoculate you so that
over and over again you have to go
through the process of I feel fear. I
have to not accept it. I fear dou. I I
feel doubt. I have to reject it. I feel
like I'm being watched. I have to reject
it. I have to give my rational brain a
chance to catch up so that I can get
objective facts about the scenario. And
there are some people who don't do it
well. There are some people who never
inoculate themselves against fear. So
then they end up getting cut from the
farm. So for the average Joe that's
listening to this now or Jenny the
average Jenny that's listening to this
now and they live a life that's held
them back because of their fear you know
they don't take the risk they don't um
raise their hand to do the presentation
they don't lean into uncertainty based
on your training in the CIA what would
you suggest that they should do to get
over that fear
so they need to inoculate themselves as
well
inoculate inoculate means
inoculate means expose yourself in
controlled ways to fear. Very similar to
the way you inoculate against COVID or
you inoculate against the flu, right?
You expose yourself to a strain that's
weakened so that your body can gain some
sort of familiarity with it. You do the
same thing with fear. So, if you're
afraid to give that presentation,
you're not ever going to change the fact
that you're afraid to give a
presentation, but you will be able to
change something that you're less afraid
of. So, if you're afraid of going to the
gym, if you're afraid of uh eating at a
certain restaurant down the street, if
you're afraid of stepping out of your
front door, if you're afraid of asking
your friend their opinion about whether
or not you're overweight, find something
small where you are less afraid of this
than you are of this other thing. And
inoculate yourself with this. like lean
into the small fears, the fears that you
already know are kind of irrational and
simple. And if you can overcome those,
what will happen is you will start to
gain momentum. And the thing that you do
to inoculate yourself is to to know
upfront. You know, you're going to have
an emotional reaction. You already know
it. It's the thing that you're afraid of
it. You can predict that. So, you
already know I'm gonna ask my buddy
Steve if he thinks that I'm overweight.
I'm terrified to ask him. He's either
going to say yes or no, or he's going to
take some copout answer and ask me what
I think, but I already know that it's
going to feel uncomfortable, but he's my
buddy. It's low risk. Let's see how it h
let's see what it goes. Right? So, you
go and you ask the question, you put
yourself in the face of fear. You're
still going to have the heart
palpitations, the cold sweats. Your
emotional brain's going to take off and
all your physiology is going to like let
loose. But then Steve is going to tell
you his answer and it's over. And then
all of a sudden you're like, "Oh, that
wasn't nearly as bad as I thought it was
going to be." And then when you do the
same thing with your friend Jenny and
the same thing with your friend Bruce
and the same thing with your friend
Robert, by the time Robert tells you his
answer, your body is not reacting the
same way as it did when you talk to
Steve. Small inoculations
are training your emotional brain to
slow down and training your rational
brain to speed up. So then you move on
to the next most scary thing without
going to the scariest of things.
You know, I was thinking about that as
you you were talking and I was thinking,
gosh, I think a lot of people know that.
I think they know that the way to get
better at speaking on stage is to go and
speak on stage, but they're still held
back by, you know, oh god, if I do that,
I'm going to mess up and then people are
going to think I'm this, that, and the
other, and then I'll never X Y Z,
right?
So you can say that to someone, but
getting them to take that first step
seems to be the impossibility. And and
here's where here's where the former CA
officer in me comes out because if
you're too afraid to do that, good. I
don't want you to do it because you
being unable to do it gives me the
advantage.
The person who's listening to this who
says to themselves, "I'm scared, but
I'll do it anyways." That's the person
who deserves the opportunity to change
their life. The person who's listening
to this that says, "I'm too scared to do
that." Good. I need you to stay exactly
where you are because in our world, the
the flatout truth is our world needs
COGS. Our world needs people who are
trapped in the consumer cycle. We need
those people because the people who are
trapped in that consumer cycle, the
people who are prisoners to their fear
are the people who run the economy. It's
the people who are willing to break that
cycle and capitalize on the fears that
you can't overcome. Those are the people
who actually provide you the service
that you need because you can't do it by
yourself. So, I want to encourage the
people who are willing to take the scary
step and I also want to discourage the
people who already know that they're too
afraid.
We need both.
As you know, Whooper is sponsor of this
podcast and I'm an investor in the
company. I've spoken about this many
times before, but I'm obsessed with
finding 1% gains in all that I do. I'm a
big believer in the theory of marginal
gains, especially in health and in
fitness. Seeing 1%s and small
improvements in my Whoop data, be it
with my sleep or my heart rate
variability or other health indicators,
gives me this incredible sense of
forward motion. And over time, the
ultimate result of these gains means a
healthier and better version of myself
in the long run. My Whoop, which is this
thing on my wrist, has really allowed me
to understand actions that I don't
necessarily need to completely change,
but things that I can tweak in order to
become the person that I want to be and
go in the right direction with my
health. So, if you're obsessed with
finding those 1% marginal gains as well,
like I am, go to join.woop.com/ceo
where you can try Whoop for 30 days
risk-free with zero commitment to see
how impactful it can be for you. You met
your wife while you were um an
undercover CIA operative.
Yeah, it was uh I'm I am still to this
day very thankful that she is a poor
judge of character. [laughter]
In 2014, you leave the CIA age 34 years
old. You both resigned together.
We both resigned together.
Why?
Uh it was mostly my idea. My wife had a
stellar career. Uh we had a one-year-old
child at the time and we were at a point
in our career coming off of very
successful operations together right
before that where we were both kind of
middle management. And that middle
management lifestyle meant that we're
spending 12 to 16 hours a day on the job
just like most people. But the
difference is when you're spending 16
hours a day on the job, it means that
you're in a skiff somewhere. You're you
can't take your work home. You can't
work from home. So you're literally
absent from the house.
So trying to coordinate two 16-hour
schedules along with a one-year-old when
neither of us signed up to be that kind
of parent. We both wanted to be the kind
of parent that was present for our
children and instead we're giving our
child to some daycare center and paying
extra overage fees to have that daycare
center keep the baby for 12 hours a day.
It's it's a sucky situation. So, for
family reasons,
more so than for career reasons, we both
decided, hey, let's let's double down on
family and let's see if we can't start
all over again.
Are you going to leave America in 2030?
I'm going to try and leave America in
2027.
I read that somewhere. Why Why are you
going to try and leave America in 2027?
So, I think the United States is going
through a very difficult time right now,
and I think most people understand that.
Uh we are a young country, no matter how
much we think that we are the best in
the world. We are actually going through
the early part of our adolescence as a
nation. And you can see it playing out
every day in the headlines. You can see
it in our in our role in geopol
geopolitical events. You can see that we
are
we're suffering in terms of trying to
identify ourselves. We don't know do we
want to be a real democracy? Do we want
to be kind of a partial democracy? Do we
want to treat everybody as equal? Do we
not want to treat everybody as equal?
We're we're struggling in the same way
that you and I did through middle
school,
right? [clears throat]
My children
mean the world to me. And what I want to
do is give them a life where they have
the choice to do anything they want to
do. Unfortunately, I don't believe our
country for the next 5 to 10 years is
going to be the kind of country that
allows children of today to choose and
be whatever they want to be. I think our
country has some growing up of its own
to do before we really offer people
equal access to opportunities. So for
me,
if I was my 11-year-old son,
when I turned 15 or 16 years old and I
start to really care about something, I
would like to be in a place where I can
explore that thing. I don't think that's
going to be in the United States. I
think that's going to be in Europe. I
think that's going to be in the Middle
East. I think that's going to be in
Latin America where he will have all the
advantages of the world
outside of the United States.
What do you think about what's going on
at the moment with geopolitics as it
relates to like China and the US? Um
there's a bit of a power struggle going
on and there has been but a lot of
people forecast that China is eventually
going to overtake or maybe it already
has the US as the sort of global
economic force. Um are you preparing for
that? Do you think it's going to happen?
I think that there's there's
two realistic outcomes and there's one
less realistic outcome. The most
realistic outcome is that the United
States and China continue to compete and
reach parody equality with each other.
That's the most realistic outcome. Maybe
the United States remains 10% bigger.
Maybe China gets 2% bigger economically.
But they approach par. They approach
equality. I don't want to live
in the United States when it loses so
much status that another country reaches
economic parody. Think about that for a
second. The world is accustomed to one
superpower.
Once there are two superpowers,
everything changes. There's two massive
languages, and you're going to have to
choose which language you speak. There's
two currencies. Which currency are you
going to save your your money in?
There's competing priorities. There's
competing politics. There's equally
massive sophisticated militaries.
When you are in one of those two
countries, at the moment that they reach
parody, you are in the most dangerous
position because the number one target
for China will be the United States. The
number one target for the United States
will be China. Right now, there's not
parity. There's not equality. So, the
United States has to worry about
everybody. And China doesn't really have
to worry about many people at all. But
as the that equality gets closer and
closer, there's more and more threat.
Think about it in business terms. When
you're the industry leader in your
business,
Google,
you don't have to worry about much. You
have to worry about all the little guys,
but nobody's really a direct threat. But
as soon as somebody else rises to meet
you, you have to worry about it. The
leader used to be Yahoo,
right? Yahoo had to see what it's like
to lose and gain parody with Google only
to then be eclipsed, right? So most
probable outcome we reach par. Second
most probable outcome is that China does
supersede us by small amounts right 5%
GDP 10% GDP and the United States has to
regain its momentum to try to gain back
the edge. So now you have this cycle
back and forth, right? Where for five
years, China is the leading GDP, for
five years the United States is the
leading GDP, and you have this waffling
back and forth, which makes you even
less secure than if you were in direct
parody. But that's that's a scary place
to be as well. You still have to lose
all the influence to get there, and when
you're there, you never know how long
it's going to last.
Do you think we're already engaged in a
form of World War II?
Yeah, absolutely. I think World War II
is already happening. I think World War
II is not what people think it was going
to be. I think people were afraid that
World War II was somehow going to look
like another World War II. Instead,
World War II is a a war of proxy
nations. It's a war uh it's a war where
smaller third world countries are
competing against each other and they're
being funded by larger countries that
are actually in conflict with one
another. Ukraine and Russia. US is
funding Ukraine. Russia is obviously
taking care of itself. But the real
conflict in Ukraine isn't about Ukraine.
It's about the West versus Russia. The
same thing is going to happen with
Taiwan and China. When the time comes
that that China makes its biggest move
on Taiwan, it's already made the small
moves on Taiwan. When it makes its
largest move on Taiwan, it's going to
become a question of China versus the
West and whoever supports Taiwan. So
going back to where we started then um
the average Joe the average Joe's
listening to this conversation now what
they really want is to make their life
better in whatever subjective measure
that they consider better to be um they
want to start that business they want to
launch that project they want to kind of
get get outside of this sort of
emotional prison that they live in where
their life is dominated by perception
what they what they think their own sort
of confines of their identity. What is
the sort of closing argument and closing
advice you give to the average Joe to
liberate themselves so that they can
pursue whatever they want to pursue?
So the the most important thing is to
take action. That is the most even if
it's the wrong action. If you take the
wrong step, if you take the first step
in the wrong direction, the difference
between you and the person who doesn't
take a step at all is the world. You
have to take the first step. You have to
take some kind of action. Just by taking
action, you show that you're not trapped
by fear. You show that you're willing to
challenge your own perception of the
world and try to gain some perspective.
It doesn't matter what that action is. I
don't care whether you read a book,
whether you buy a program, whether you
whether you sell your first prototype,
take some kind of action because nine
out of every 10 people are not going to
take any action. You already have an
advantage just by trying. And so few
people understand that. They think
there's some kind of advantage in
waiting. There isn't. The longer you
wait, all you're really doing is giving
the other nine people a chance to be the
first one to take a step. If you take
the first step, you beat the competition
right out of the gates. And you know
this as well as I do, even if your first
three or four steps are fumbles and
trips and you fall on your face, by the
time you stand up, you're four steps
away from the rest of the competition.
And you've learned a lot in those first
four steps. So my suggestion is take
action. Take action using the skills
that we talked about today. Take action
using the skills that you've talked
about on some other podcast. Just take
action.
Identity. We talked about how the the
CIA kind of rewrite your identity a
little bit so that you know it gives you
some sort of cover. But one of the
things that stops us taking action is
our own identity. What have you come to
learn and what do you think now about
the role of identity? How it gets in our
way and how we can liberate ourselves
from it? The worst person to determine
who you are is oftentimes you because
you see it all. You live in your own
secret life. The rest of the world sees
your public life. Even if your public
life is accidental, the world sees you
differently than you see yourself. So
when you look at yourself, it's like
looking through a magnifying glass. You
see every wart. You see every every
crevice. you see everything wrong
because you have the magnifying glass.
The rest of the world, not only do they
not have a magnifying glass, but they're
standing 10 ft away from you. So, they
see something very different than what
you see. So, a lot of times whatever you
think about yourself is actually
inaccurate when you apply it against the
test of perspective because what other
people see and what other people think
of you, you are usually very wrong from
what they think. We have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest not knowing who they're going to
be leaving it for. Now, the question
that's been left for you in the diary of
a CEO is um
very very interesting.
What is something you used to strongly
believe
that you have fundamentally changed your
mind on?
I used to believe that
people
could be equal
and fundamentally now I know that people
will never be equal because equality is
not really the thing that we're after.
What we're secretly after that we don't
want to admit to is we're always after
being better, having more, being in a
better position than everyone else. So,
we will constantly strive to take
advantage of secrets, to take advantage
of opportunities, to find an edge that
we do not share with other people. But
publicly we will say that we wish there
was more equality and that we want there
to be more equality when secretly we
don't. I used to be one of those people
that wanted everything to be equal. And
now I am one of those people who is very
happy in a world where things are not
equal.
Why?
Because I see through the noise. I
understand
that what we want isn't what we actually
say. So these politicians that are
saying, you know, maybe on the left that
are saying, you know, we want equality.
We want everyone to be equal, you think
they're bullshitting.
Absolutely. That's not what they want.
What do they want?
What they want is more of the current
status quo, which is to have conflict
with the opposite side. And what they
also want on top of that is to be in a
position where the masses trust the
politician to be in control over more
aspects of the population's life.
Andrew, thank you so much.
Thank you so much. I feel so um
inspired, a little bit excited um and
energized by this conversation and I'm I
think it's so incredible that you've
committed your this sort of chapter of
your life to helping people unlock their
full potential by un by knowing the way
that humans work and being able to use
the understanding of a human that was
probably getting in their way to free
themselves and pursue whatever sort of
goal they have in their lives that they
think will provide them with
fulfillment. because that's really how I
see what you're doing. You're taking a
skill set that's been exclusive and
given to only a few and giving it to
many. You do that through Everyday Spy.
Andrew, thank you so much. It's been an
absolute honor.
Thanks for having me, man. [music]
[music]